I used to be ADDICTED to Diet Coke. 
I hate puzzles. 
I was in a commercial for my aunt and uncle’s store. 
I have a scar on my left hand from where I cat bit me when I was babysitting when I was 12.
I used to try to sleep in my splits when I was a dancer because I wanted to have perfect flexibility.
I love being outside, but I hate smelling like outside.
I am afraid of jack-in-the-boxes even though I know when they are going to pop out.
In second grade, I fell off the counter I was standing on trying to get a mug for milk and I had to wear an ice pack in my pants to school for a couple weeks. 
For the third grade play, the part I wanted the most was to play the mom.
I almost went to the University of Iowa to major in English and be on the dance team.
The high school I graduated from, I only went to for my senior year. 
My sister, Caroline, and I get asked if we are twins all the time, and when people find out we aren’t actually twins, they always think she’s older.
I’m really close to my Dad.
When my parents first met Cam’s parents, they kept saying how Cam’s mom looked so familiar, but couldn’t figure out where they’d seen her before. 
Cam and I planned for him to ask me out on November 15th because 15 was his favorite number.
When I was younger I was OBSESSED with Jesse McCartney in the way that some people nowadays are obsessed with One Direction.
I either get told I look like Hilary Duff or Leighton Meester. I’m ok with either of those!!
A lot of people can’t figure out what nationality I am. Some people say I look 100% American and some people think I’m Asian. I am 50% Honduran and my mom is from the states.
No, I am not fluent in Spanish.
I haven’t had un-painted toenails in 6 years. I just don’t like the way my toenails look without polish haha!!
I was a drill team officer in high school and it was one of the most challenging and rewarding positions.
I’m a literature nerd. I LOVE Shakespeare, Jane Austen, Charlotte Bronte, and anything Greek mythology.
I ALMOST got certified to be a Zumba instructor, but then I was transferring so I didn’t. 
Oddly enough, I think my favorite food ever is tuna salad.
I’m obsessed with libraries and churches. When I’m in a new town, I like to wander around those if I can find them!
My favorite place in the world is Eureka Springs, Arkansas.
I didn’t get a cell phone until my freshman year of high school, and I didn’t get an iPhone until I was a junior in high school.
If I could have any job in the world, I would own a coffee shop that also sold art, flowers, and stationary. 
I plan on working for myself at some point in my life. 
I’m insanely good with state capitols.