CHAPTER I
"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of theBuonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,if you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated by thatAntichrist--I really believe he is Antichrist--I will have nothing moreto do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer my 'faithfulslave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have frightenedyou--sit down and tell me all the news."
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Anna PavlovnaScherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Withthese words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high rank andimportance, who was the first to arrive at her reception. Anna Pavlovnahad had a cough for some days. She was, as she said, suffering from lagrippe; grippe being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by theelite.
All her invitations without exception, written in French, and deliveredby a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
"If you have nothing better to do, Count (or Prince), and if theprospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible,I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10--AnnetteScherer."
"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in the leastdisconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearing anembroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and had stars onhis breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in thatrefined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but thought, andwith the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to a man of importancewho had grown old in society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna,kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining head,and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend's mindat rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath the politeness andaffected sympathy of which indifference and even irony could bediscerned.
"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in times likethese if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You are staying thewhole evening, I hope?"
"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. I mustput in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter is coming forme to take me there."
"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all thesefestivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment would have beenput off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habitsaid things he did not even wish to be believed.
"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev'sdispatch? You know everything."
"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold, listlesstone. "What has been decided? They have decided that Buonaparte hasburnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready to burn ours."
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating a stalepart. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years,overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast hadbecome her social vocation and, sometimes even when she did not feellike it, she became enthusiastic in order not to disappoint theexpectations of those who knew her. The subdued smile which, though itdid not suit her faded features, always played round her lips expressed,as in a spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming defect,which she neither wished, nor could, nor considered it necessary, tocorrect.
In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovna burstout:
"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understand things,but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war. She isbetraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our gracious sovereignrecognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That is the onething I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to performthe noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that God willnot forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation and crush the hydra ofrevolution, which has become more terrible than ever in the person ofthis murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of the justone.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?... England with her commercialspirit will not and cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's loftinessof soul. She has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, andstill seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What answer didNovosiltsev get? None. The English have not understood and cannotunderstand the self-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing forhimself, but only desires the good of mankind. And what have theypromised? Nothing! And what little they have promised they will notperform! Prussia has always declared that Buonaparte is invincible, andthat all Europe is powerless before him.... And I don't believe a wordthat Hardenburg says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussianneutrality is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the loftydestiny of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!"
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had been sentinstead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured the King ofPrussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will you give me acup of tea?"
"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I am expectingtwo very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart, who isconnected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the bestFrench families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the good ones. Andalso the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? He has beenreceived by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me," headded with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurred to him,though the question he was about to ask was the chief motive of hisvisit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to beappointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accounts is a poorcreature."
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but others weretrying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure it for thebaron.
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither she noranyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired or waspleased with.
"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by her sister,"was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed anexpression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled withsadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustriouspatroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funkebeaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with the womanly andcourtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pavlovna wishedboth to rebuke him (for daring to speak as he had done of a manrecommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him, so shesaid:
"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter came outeveryone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazinglybeautiful."
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearer tothe prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show that political andsocial topics were ended and the time had come for intimateconversation--"I often think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life aredistributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid children? I don'tspeak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't like him," she added in a toneadmitting of no rejoinder and raising her eyebrows. "Two such charmingchildren. And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so youdon't deserve to have them."
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said I lack thebump of paternity."
"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know I amdissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and her faceassumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Her Majesty'sand you were pitied...."
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,awaiting a reply. He frowned.
"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all afather could for their education, and they have both turned out fools.Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an active one. Thatis the only difference between them." He said this smiling in a way morenatural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouthvery clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not a fatherthere would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna Pavlovna,looking up pensively.
"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that mychildren are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. Thatis how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by agesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?" sheasked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and though Idon't feel that weakness in myself as yet, I know a little person who isvery unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess MaryBolkonskaya."
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memory andperception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by a movement ofthe head that he was considering this information.
"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sadcurrent of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousandrubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be in fiveyears, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's what wefathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. He is thewell-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the army under thelate Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He is very cleverbut eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She has abrother; I think you know him, he married Lise Meinen lately. He is anaide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be here tonight."
"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Anna Pavlovna'shand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange that affair forme and I shall always be your most devoted slave-slafe with an f, as avillage elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of goodfamily and that's all I want."
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raised themaid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and fro ashe lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise, youngBolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing can bearranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start myapprenticeship as old maid."



CHAPTER II
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highestPetersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in ageand character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.Prince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take her fatherto the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and her badgeas maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known as lafemme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg, * was also there. She had beenmarried during the previous winter, and being pregnant did not go to anylarge gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince Vasili's son,Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. The Abbe Morioand many others had also come.

* The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen my aunt,"or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him or her to alittle old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had comesailing in from another room as soon as the guests began to arrive; andslowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pavlovnamentioned each one's name and then left them.
Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom notone of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of themcared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournful andsolemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them inthe same words, about their health and her own, and the health of HerMajesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor, thoughpoliteness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman with asense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not returnto her the whole evening.
The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in a gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a delicatedark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth, but itlifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when sheoccasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the casewith a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect--the shortness of herupper lip and her half-open mouth--seemed to be her own special andpeculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this prettyyoung woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, andcarrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young oneswho looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her alittle while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of lifeand health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smileand the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in aspecially amiable mood that day.
The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swayingsteps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress satdown on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was apleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present."Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me," sheadded, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite asmall reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she spreadout her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress,girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone else,"replied Anna Pavlovna.
"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still inFrench, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is goingto get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" sheadded, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer sheturned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince Vasili toAnna Pavlovna.
One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man withclose-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionableat that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stoutyoung man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-knowngrandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young manhad not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had onlyjust returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was hisfirst appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with the nod sheaccorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite ofthis lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sightof something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her facewhen she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger thanthe other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to theclever though shy, but observant and natural, expression whichdistinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poorinvalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her auntas she conducted him to her.
Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round asif in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the littleprincess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from theaunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health. AnnaPavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the AbbeMorio? He is a most interesting man."
"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is veryinteresting but hardly feasible."
"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something and getaway to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now committed areverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before she hadfinished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to another whowished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet spread apart,he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbe's plan chimerical.
"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, sheresumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, readyto help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As theforeman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goesround and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one thatcreaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check themachine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about herdrawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by aword or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety aboutPierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approachedthe group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, andagain when he passed to another group whose center was the abbe.
Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna Pavlovna'swas the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all theintellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a childin a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing anyclever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident andrefined expression on the faces of those present he was always expectingto hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio. Here theconversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an opportunityto express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.



CHAPTER III
Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummedsteadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn facewas rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company hadsettled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round theabbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful PrincessHelene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the little Princess Bolkonskaya,very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age. The thirdgroup was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polishedmanners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out ofpoliteness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle inwhich he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him up as atreat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as a speciallychoice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in thekitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna served up to herguests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarly choicemorsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing themurder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien hadperished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular reasonsfor Buonaparte's hatred of him.
"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna, with apleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV in the sound ofthat sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness tocomply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone tolisten to his tale.
"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to one ofthe guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she to another."How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to a third; andthe vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest and mostadvantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hotdish.
The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to the beautifulyoung princess who was sitting some way off, the center of anothergroup.
The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with whichshe had first entered the room--the smile of a perfectly beautifulwoman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss andivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparklingdiamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not lookingat any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each theprivilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders, back,and bosom--which in the fashion of those days were very much exposed--and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as she movedtoward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was so lovely that not only did she notshow any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared shy ofher unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She seemed to wish,but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted hisshoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinarywhen she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with herunchanging smile.
"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he, smilinglyinclining his head.
The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considereda reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story wasbeing told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still morebeautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From timeto time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the storyproduced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted justthe expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsedinto her radiant smile.
The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinkingof?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talkingmerrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in herseat.
"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, shetook up her work.
Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle andmoving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance tohis beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of thisresemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like hissister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by thewonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary wasdulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouthall seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms andlegs always fell into unnatural positions.
"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside theprincess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without thisinstrument he could not begin to speak.
"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging hisshoulders.
"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone whichshowed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he haduttered them.
He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be surewhether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in adark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nympheeffrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to visitMademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte, who alsoenjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence Napoleonhappened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was subject,and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and thismagnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point wherethe rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies lookedagitated.
"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at the littleprincess.
"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into herwork as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the storyprevented her from going on with it.
The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefullyprepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept awatchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he wastalking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried to therescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbe aboutthe balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the youngman's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both weretalking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why AnnaPavlovna disapproved.
"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of thepeople," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for one powerfulnation like Russia--barbaric as she is said to be--to place herselfdisinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object themaintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save theworld!"
"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's faceinstantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugaryexpression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of thesociety, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have hadthe honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think ofthe climate," said he.
Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the moreconveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into thelarger circle.



CHAPTER IV
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince AndrewBolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome youngman, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything abouthim, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It wasevident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but hadfound them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen tothem. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed tobore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from herwith a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna Pavlovna'shand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.
"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing thelast syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been pleasedto take me as an aide-de-camp...."
"And Lise, your wife?"
"She will go to the country."
"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettishmanner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been telling ussuch a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from themoment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked roundPrince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever wastouching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him anunexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to Pierre.
"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper withyou. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the vicomtewho was continuing his story.
"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre'shand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wished tosay something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and his daughtergot up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman,holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent his rising."This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me of a pleasure,and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave yourenchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightlyholding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still moreradiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.
"Very," said Pierre.
In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna:"Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me a whole month andthis is the first time I have seen him in society. Nothing is sonecessary for a young man as the society of clever women."
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew hisfather to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady who hadbeen sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasiliin the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed hadleft her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety andfear.
"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into theanteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what news Imay take back to my poor boy."
Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely to theelderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him aningratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not goaway.
"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he wouldbe transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered PrinceVasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should adviseyou to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn. That would be thebest way."
The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of thebest families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out ofsociety had lost her former influential connections. She had now come toPetersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son. Itwas, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she had obtained aninvitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had sat listening to thevicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frightened her, an embitteredlook clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment; then shesmiled again and clutched Prince Vasili's arm more tightly.
"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you foranything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of myfather's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to dothis for my son--and I shall always regard you as a benefactor," sheadded hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked Golitsynand he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were," she said,trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning her beautifulhead and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she stoodwaiting by the door.
Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economizedif it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and having once realized thatif he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be unableto ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But inPrincess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after her second appeal, somethinglike qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was quite true;he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in his career.Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of those women--mostly mothers--who, having once made up their minds, will not restuntil they have gained their end, and are prepared if necessary to go oninsisting day after day and hour after hour, and even to make scenes.This last consideration moved him.
"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity andweariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's memory,I will do the impossible--your son shall be transferred to the Guards.Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you--I knew yourkindness!" He turned to go.
"Wait--just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..." shefaltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovich Kutuzov...recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at rest, andthen..."
Prince Vasili smiled.
"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered sincehis appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all theMoscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as adjutants."
"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "weshall be late."
"Well, au revoir! Good-bye! You hear her?"
"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably camenaturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed allthe old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her faceresumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to thegroup where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended tolisten, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task wasaccomplished.



CHAPTER V
"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?"asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Luccalaying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and MonsieurBuonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of thenations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as ifthe whole world had gone crazy."
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcasticsmile.
"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very finewhen he said that," he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Diomi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"

* God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass runover," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able toendure this man who is a menace to everything."
"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite buthopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for Louis XVII,for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became moreanimated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayalof the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadorsto compliment the usurper."
And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some timethrough his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward thelittle princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condecoat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravityas if she had asked him to do it.
"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.
The princess listened, smiling.
"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," thevicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with which heis better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to others butfollows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too far.By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I meangood French society--will have been forever destroyed, and then..."
He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished tomake a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,who had him under observation, interrupted:
"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which alwaysaccompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has declaredthat he will leave it to the French people themselves to choose theirown form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper,the whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of itsrightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to the royalistemigrant.
"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quiterightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think it willbe difficult to return to the old regime."
"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into theconversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over toBonaparte's side."
"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte withoutlooking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult to know the realstate of French public opinion."
"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.
It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming hisremarks at him, though without looking at him.
"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" PrinceAndrew continued after a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words."'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' I do not know how farhe was justified in saying so."
"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duceven the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to somepeople," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and onehero less on earth."
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciationof the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into the conversation, andthough Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something inappropriate, shewas unable to stop him.
"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was apolitical necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatnessof soul by not fearing to take on himself the whole responsibility ofthat deed."
"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.
"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination showsgreatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawing herwork nearer to her.
"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.
"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his kneewith the palm of his hand.
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at hisaudience over his spectacles and continued.
"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled fromthe Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleon aloneunderstood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the general good,he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great becausehe rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved allthat was good in it--equality of citizenship and freedom of speech andof the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."
"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commitmurder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should have called hima great man," remarked the vicomte.
"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might ridthem of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man. TheRevolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying bythis desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and hiswish to express all that was in his mind.
"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... Butwon't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
"Rousseau's Contrat Social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.
"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."
"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected anironical voice.
"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important.What is important are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices,and equality of citizenship, and all these ideas Napoleon has retainedin full force."
"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at lastdeciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were,"high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Who does not loveliberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality.Have people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. Wewanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to thevicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first moment ofPierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, washorror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had notexasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it wasimpossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte ina vigorous attack on the orator.
"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the factof a great man executing a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocentand untried?"
"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the18th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not atall like the conduct of a great man!"
"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said thelittle princess, shrugging her shoulders.
"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.
Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. Hissmile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled, hisgrave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced by another--a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to askforgiveness.
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that thisyoung Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested. All weresilent.
"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew."Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish betweenhis acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor. So itseems to me."
"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of thisreinforcement.
"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man wasgreat on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where hegave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there are other actswhich it is difficult to justify."
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness ofPierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time togo.
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend,and asking them all to be seated began:
"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it.Excuse me, Vicomte--I must tell it in Russian or the point will belost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russianas a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.Everyone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand theirattention to his story.
"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. She musthave two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That was hertaste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas withdifficulty.
"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on a livery,get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make some calls.'"
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before hisaudience, which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator. Severalpersons, among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, did howeversmile.
"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hat andher long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself no longer andwent on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole world knew...."
And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he had toldit, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovna and theothers appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in so agreeably endingPierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After the anecdote theconversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last andnext balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom, and when andwhere.



CHAPTER VI
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guests beganto take their leave.
Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with hugered hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawingroom and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say somethingparticularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the general'sthree-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume, till the generalasked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and inability toenter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by his kindly,simple, and modest expression. Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and, witha Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion,nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also hope you willchange your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybodysaw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions areopinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." Andeveryone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders tothe footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listenedindifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had alsocome into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnantprincess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in a lowvoice.
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match shecontemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Writeto her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"--and she left the hall.
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his faceclose to her, began to whisper something.
Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and acloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to theFrench sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air ofunderstanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usualspoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte"-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"
"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing upher downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be there."
"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolytesmiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he evenpushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either fromawkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after theshawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, asthough embracing her.
Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at herhusband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did heseem.
"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashionreached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porchfollowing the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well aswith his feet.
The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the darkcarriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, underpretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeabletone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently andaffectionately.
The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolytelaughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomtewhom he had promised to take home.
"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself besideHippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very niceindeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers. Hippolyteburst out laughing.
"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer whogives himself the airs of a monarch."
Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you weresaying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has toknow how to deal with them."
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like onequite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, tookfrom the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar'sCommentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," saidPrince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.
Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eagerface to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in theright light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but--I do notknow how to express it... not by a balance of political power...."
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstractconversation.
"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you atlast decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or adiplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."
"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, andhad remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow hisfather dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go toPetersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree toanything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write tome all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had alreadybeen choosing a career for three months, and had not decided onanything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.Pierre rubbed his forehead.
"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he hadmet that evening.
"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let ustalk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted totell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war forfreedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world isnot right."