The bravest thing I've ever done was give a product demonstration to a live audience of over one thousand people.
My role model is my dad because he immigrated to Canada when he was only 18, got a job right away, and worked hard to provide for our family.
I have worked in marketing for over half my life.
I have travelled to over 30 countries for business. My favourite one was Japan because they have a lot of delicious food.
The first time I ever moved away from home was participating in a job internship 500 miles away from my hometown.
I'm currently reading a book about financial technology to better familiarize myself with the industry and its ongoing trends.
I can speak four different languages: English, Spanish, Italian, and French.
I was 17 when I got my first job at a fast-food restaurant, which helped me develop leadership, communication and listening skills.
My favourite subject in school was English, which is why I decided to become a writer.
I once set the record for most products sold in one day during my previous sales job.
My previous supervisor would describe me as reliable since I regularly submitted high-quality work by their respective deadlines.
One of my hidden talents is negotiating with others, which I believe is what makes me a strong sales representative.
My favourite part about my job is pitching unique advertising campaign ideas that help small businesses stand out from competitors.
One of my main professional goals is to one day become the president of a financial corporation./em>
Something I can improve about myself is my software knowledge, which is why I currently take technology courses during the evenings and weekends.
My favourite hobby is hiking on the Bruce Trail every weekend.
My dream vacation is going to Cappadocia and riding in a hot air balloon.
I love to cook. My signature dish is homemade spaghetti and meatballs.
I'm currently taking Spanish courses because I hope to visit Spain at the end of the year.
If I could have any superpower, it would be to speak any language so I could connect with anyone in the world.
An accomplishment I'm most proud of is teaching myself how to play the guitar in three months.
If I could eat one type of cuisine for the rest of my life, it would be Italian food, as I enjoy pasta and pizza.
When I was younger, I wanted to be a pilot, which led me to later earn my pilot's license.
I have a collection of mugs. I get a new mug in every country I go to, so I currently have 24.
In high school and college, I starred as a lead in four different musicals
I have five siblings. Two older brothers and two younger sisters. We're all close in age, so most of us grew up attending the same schools as each other.
I had two pet hamsters when I was younger.
My favourite meal to cook is salted egg, chicken and rice. I serve it at holiday gatherings with my family every year.
The first car I ever owned was a red sedan.
My favourite animal is a dog because they're so energetic and friendly.